Source: Italianrecipebook
URL: https://www.italianrecipebook.com/caprese-salad/

Caprese Salad (How Italians Make It) : Italian Recipe Book


















































































 








 




























Italian Recipe Book






menu icon










Home


Recipe Index


About


Subscribe














subscribe












search icon












Home


Recipe Index


About


Subscribe












×
Home
 » 
Recipes
 » 
Salads
Caprese Salad (How Italians Make It)


Aug 31, 2018
 · Modified: 
Jun 12, 2024
 by 
Svitlana
 · This post may contain affiliate links · 
6 Comments
 






1550


shares








 


Pinterest




 


Facebook




 


Yummly




Jump to Recipe


Caprese Salad 
(insalata Caprese)
 is a cult dish of Italian cuisine. Not only it represent the Italian tri-color flag but also uses arguably the most popular ingredients in Italy: tomatoes, mozzarella and basil.


The best part? This Italian salad is ready in 5 minutes flat and you can serve it as an appetizer, a side or even a meal in and of itself.






Caprese salad originated in Campagna region on the small island of Capri in the gulf of Naples. And as many Italian dishes the geographical origin gave the name to the dish.


Table Of Contents
A Legend Says...
Ingredients
Caprese Salad Variations
How To Make - Step By Step With Pictures
Tips From The Locals
More Recipes with Caprese Flavor
Ways To Serve It
Full Recipe


A Legend Says...


There is a legend that Caprese Salad was first seen in 1920s at the dinner reception of a famous Italian poet and his colleague at 
Hotel Quisisana of Capri
.


It was an attempt to add fresh notes to the classic menu of the restaurant AND emphasize on the patriotic colors of Italy that are represented so well in Caprese Salad.


Simplicity in preparation and a perfect marriage of the ingredients made Insalata Caprese an unbeatable choice, especially for summer menu.


But before you start slicing tomatoes and mozzarella in anticipation of enjoying Caprese Salad there are some ground rules on how not to ruin what’s already perfect.




Ingredients


The beauty of Caprese salad is that it uses only a handful of ingredients. The quality of these ingredients will determine the final result.






Tomatoes 
- beefsteak, bull’s heart or any other heirloom tomatoes have the most flavor and "meaty" texture which is perfect paired with fresh Mozzarella cheese. Choose tomatoes that are ripe enough but still firm to the touch. Over-ripe tomatoes will result mushy when cut and have too much juice going in the salad.


Fresh Mozzarella Cheese
 - fresh mozzarella balls packed in water is your best choice. Buffalo Mozzarella is also great if you can find.


Fresh Basil
 - leaves fresh picked from your garden or your windowsill is the dream scenario. But those bought from the farmers market or from the store as long as they maintain their bright color and freshness will do equally well.


Dried oregano
 - is relatively an optional seasoning but it’s used a lot. It balances well with fresh basil and fills some spicy notes that otherwise you would want to kick up with some ground pepper.


Extra virgin olive oil
 - adds another level of flavor so use the highest quality.


Nothing Else
 - And the last, but most important thought...
RESIST adding anything else
. Example: balsamic vinegar, balsamic glaze or other dressings! I know, temptation is high but if you resist it the reward will pay 10 fold.




See the recipe card for full information on ingredients and quantities.




Caprese Salad Variations




Use a mix of tomatoes
. Add more color to your Caprese Salad by using a mix of different color tomatoes like yellow, purple etc.


Rustic Caprese
. No fancy layering needed. Just tear mozzarella cheese in pieces instead of slicing it into perfect slices and do the same with basil leaves. Cut tomatoes in chunks. This will be a more rustic version but certainly without sacrificing the taste.


Burrata Caprese
. A gourmet version of classic Caprese. Instead of fresh mozzarella use creamy Burrata cheese. Since its inside is extra creamy and soft, you'd cut it only before serving. So it's best to cut up tomatoes (I prefer cherry tomatoes for this Burrata version) and mix with torn basil and olive oil, then arrange Burrata on top, sprinkle with salt, oregano. When ready to serve, cut burrata in quarters and scoop together with the bed of tomatoes and basil. 


Caprese Skewers
  - instead of using regular tomatoes and large mozzarella ball, get cherry tomatoes and small mozzarella pearls or bocconcini ("bohk-kohn-CHEE-nee") instead. This makes a perfect appetizer for parties.






How To Make - Step By Step With Pictures










Drain mozzarella cheese from liquid and let it sit at room temperature for at least 10 minutes.












Slice each mozzarella ball into about ⅓ inch (8 millimeters) slices. If needed, tap with a paper towel to remove excess moisture.
















Wash, dry and slice tomatoes  approximately the same thickness of mozzarella balls.












Plate alternating layers of tomato, mozzarella and basil leaves. Generously drizzle with extra virgin olive oil, and sprinkle with oregano and salt.








Fresh, full of genuine flavors Caprese Salad just like if you’d have it in Italy 😋






Tips From The Locals




Use mozzarella at room temperature 
. Always bring mozzarella to room temperature before slicing it. Don't slice mozzarella straight from the fridge. As it warms it'll start releasing the liquid that you don't want to go in the salad.\


Equal slices
. Try to slice tomatoes and mozzarella in slices of the same thickness so that their flavor is balanced in each bite.


Don't wash basil
. Instead clean it by tapping with a damp paper towel. If you have a plant of basil, you can wash the leaves on the plant and let air-dry before picking for the salad.


Use EVO oil
. That stand for extra virgin olive oil. It gives so much flavor! But don't over-do it.


Use dried oregano o pepe
. They add just the right amount of spiciness without compromising the authentic delicate flavors of tomatoes and mozzarella.


Resist adding anything else!
 Some claim that authentic Italian Caprese Salad tastes blunt - but only because they don't know how to make it. Extra virgin olive oil and oregano give just the right kick of flavor that brown balsamic soaked Caprese can only dream of.






More Recipes with Caprese Flavor




Caprese Sandwich
 - Caprese Salad + a piece of freshly baked 
ciabatta bread
 
or better yet this super easy no knead 
ciabatta rolls
 generously drizzled with extra virgin olive oil AND... you have just packed summer in a sandwich..


Pasta Caprese
 - enjoy tomato, mozzarella and basil flavors in one delicious Pasta Caprese. You can make it as cold Caprese Pasta Salad or indulge yourself with hot and creamy cold season version.


Focaccia Caprese
 - enjoy this tricolor iconic flavor combination between delicious slices of focaccia bread. Simply slice a piece of focaccia in half, drizzle with extra virgin olive oil and stuff it with slices tomatoes, mozzarella and fresh basil leaves. Use 
focaccia genovese recipe
 or 
no knead focaccia
 recipe to make delicious but effortless homemade focaccia bread.
Bonus points:
 instead of olive oil and basil leaves spread focaccia with homemade 
Pesto Genovese
.




Ways To Serve It


I usually serve Caprese Salad together with homemade focaccia or following a pasta dish but it also works great as an appetizer 
(antipasto)
 or a side dish.


Focaccia Barese with Tomatoes and Olives
Pasta Al Pesto (Super Easy & Creamy!)
Pasta Alla Norma - Authentic Sicilian Recipe
Chicken Involtini {Stuffed Chicken Rolls}








Love Italian Food? 
Sign up for our weekly newsletter to receive tips, tricks and new recipes delivered straight to your inbox!






Sign me up!






Full Recipe






Caprese Salad (How Italians Make It)


5
 from 
3
 votes






See how to make this iconic Caprese Salad the Italian Way. And by all means, avoid making the most common mistakes!




Recipe author
Author: 
Svi




PREP TIME:
7
 minutes
 
mins
TOTAL TIME:
5
 minutes
 
mins


SERVINGS: 
4




Cook Mode
Prevent your screen from going dark






 Print Recipe


 Save
Saved!


 Pin


 Rate Recipe


















Ingredients
 
3-4
 
medium size tomatoes
 
, preferably of the same size
8-10
 
oz
 
fresh Mozzarella cheese
 
, 250-300 grams
Handful basil leaves
Dried oregano
Salt
Extra virgin olive oil
Fresh black pepper to taste
 
(optional)


Instructions
 
Drain mozzarella cheese from liquid and let it sit at room temperature for at least 10 minutes.
Slice each mozzarella ball into about ⅓ inch (8 millimeters) slices. If needed, tap with a paper towel to remove excess moisture.
Wash, dry and slice tomatoes approximately the same thickness of mozzarella balls.
Tap basil basil leaves with a slightly damp paper towel.
Layer tomato, mozzarella slices and basil leaves on a platter.
Drizzle with extra virgin olive oil, sea salt, and oregano or black pepper if you prefer.




Nutrition
Calories: 
234
kcal
Carbohydrates: 
5
g
Protein: 
13
g
Fat: 
18
g
Saturated Fat: 
8
g
Polyunsaturated Fat: 
1
g
Monounsaturated Fat: 
8
g
Cholesterol: 
45
mg
Sodium: 
360
mg
Potassium: 
262
mg
Fiber: 
1
g
Sugar: 
3
g
Vitamin A: 
1152
IU
Vitamin C: 
13
mg
Calcium: 
296
mg
Iron: 
1
mg




Nutrition information is automatically calculated, so should only be used as an approximation.






 
Have a question or want to let me know you loved the recipe?
Leave a comment below! I love 
hearing from you!


More Salads
Puntarelle Alla Romana
Italian Octopus Salad
Panzanella (Tuscan Bread & Tomato Salad)
Roasted Pepper Appetizer (3 Ways to Serve It)






1550


shares








 


Pinterest




 


Facebook




 


Yummly




Comments
 





	5 from 3 votes	






Leave a Reply 
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.
 
Required fields are marked 
*


Recipe Rating
 




Recipe Rating






















































































































 






Comment 
*
 
Name 
*
 


Email 
*
 


 




Δ
 


This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. 
Learn how your comment data is processed
.










Alice
 
says
 


July 11, 2023 at 10:35 am
 










I love this recipe. It's great for the hot weather.




Reply














JB
 
says
 


April 09, 2023 at 9:20 pm
 










Thank you for not perpetuating the sin of adding balsamic to this simple salad to interfere with its subtle elegance. Balsamic is lovely and has its place but definitely not here. It is nearly impossible to find a restaurant in the US that respects this Italian salad the way it was intended to be enjoyed.




Reply














Marilyn Hill
 
says
 


June 04, 2019 at 3:29 pm
 










This the way Caprese Salad was served the very first time I had it, and I agree, it’s the best way. I have done the skewered version as well (for summer parties) and often I’ve used the large gumball-sized fresh mozzarella with the cherry tomatoes. For those non-purists, I serve it with balsamic glaze on the side.




Reply














Italian Recipe Book
 
says
 


September 19, 2019 at 12:19 pm
 




Oh yes, you can do Caprese and so many different ways. Love that you give options to people as well 🙂

Thanks for stopping by Marilyn and sorry for my late reply!!




Reply




















Buongiorno e benvenuti!
 In my small Italian kitchen I use simple, mostly seasonal ingredients and turn them into mouth-watering meals. Join me as I share the magic of Italian home cooking and teach you how you can do it in your own kitchen.


More about me →




No Bake Desserts


Panna Cotta (Classic Recipe and 3 Different Toppings)
Strawberry Tiramisu (Eggless and Without Coffee)
Tiramisu Cups
Italian Fruit Salad (Macedonia Di Frutta)


Popular Recipes


Limoncello  (Recipe, Calculations & FAQs)
Semolina Bread (Easy & Delicious)
Italian Panini Bread
Traditional Focaccia Bread {Focaccia Genovese}








Footer


↑ back to top




About




About Me


Privacy Policy


Terms & Conditions






Newsletter




Sign Up!
 for emails and updates






Keep in touch!






As an Amazon Associate I earn from qualifying purchases.


Copyright © 2025
 Italian Recipe Book










1550


shares








 






 






 






 






 























































					Rate This Recipe				
















Your vote:






















































































































 












Name *


 




Email *




 




Rate and Review Recipe




A rating is required


A name is required


An email is required














 















					Recipe Ratings without Comment				












Something went wrong. Please try again.
